# FUSTr
Families Under Selection in Transcriptomes
# Introduction  
Fuster is a pipeline that clusters coding sequences from transcriptomes into protein families, and then analyzes those families for positive selection.

# Getting started

The only software needed to run FUSTr is [Docker](https://www.docker.com/). FUSTr takes as input a directory containing transcriptome assemblies

**Important:** transcriptome assemblies need to be fasta files ending in .fasta, all in one directory.


Download FUSTr with the following command
```bash
git clone https://github.com/tijeco/FUSTr.git
```


With Docker installed correctly on your system issue the following command to initialize the Docker container

```
bash FUSTr/setup_docker.sh <directory_containing_fastas>
```

Once the docker container has been initialized you can enter it using the following command

```
docker run -it fustr /bin/bash
```

Now that you are in the docker container, your data is in /home/usr/data, to run FUSTr simply issue the following command
```
FUSTr -d ./data -t <number_of_threads>
```

The output will be in data/final_results/



You can use scp to transfer this to your local machine.

# What goes on under the hood

The file ```setup_docker.sh``` takes as input a directory that contains the transcriptome assemblies the user wishes to analyze. There may be any number of transcriptomes in this directory. The only reqirements are that they are
1. Uncompressed text files
2. Proper [FASTA format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTA_format)
3. End in .fasta
4. All contained in one directory

This directory is then added to a docker container (*located under /home/usr/data*) that installs all necessary third party dependencies, removing the need for users to install any of them on their actual system.

Once in the docker container (*automatically initiated at /home/usr*), ```FUSTr``` is installed to the system path.

Once ```FUSTr``` is executed using ```FUSTr -d ./data -t <number_of_threads>``` [Snakefile](http://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) is executed to run 10 subroutines.

1. ```cleanFasta``` takes each  input fasta file in the ./data and cleans the text file for any spurious characters that commonly occur when transferring text files between different system architectures (such as ```^M```) that will break downstram analysis. The output for this file is found in **intermediate_files/{sample}.clean**

2. ```newHeaders``` takes as input the output from ```cleanFasta```. It further cleans the headers only keeping the first fields of text (some times headers have whole paragraphs of unnecessary information describing the sequence, so these are removed). Then these cleaned headers are analyzed to infer any patterns that may exist. The detected header patterns are placed in **headerPatterns.txt**, the output of the fasta files with new headers are placed in **intermediate_files/{sample}.new_headers**

3. ```orf``` takes as input the outputfrom ```newHeaders```. The program [Transdecoder](https://github.com/TransDecoder/TransDecoder/wiki) finds coding sequences from these transcripts, the output is placed in both **{sample}.new_headers.transdecoder.pep** and **{sample}.new_headers.transdecoder.cds**. Additional output from Transdecoder can be found in **{sample}.new_headers.transdecoder_dir**

4. ```longIsoform``` takes as input the files from ```orf``` and **headerPatterns.txt**
 as input to filter isoforms. It looks for genes that have multiple possible isoforms and only passes along the longest isoform for further analysis. The output can be found in **intermediate_files/{sample}.longestIsoform.pep** and **intermediate_files/{sample}.longestIsoform.cds**
5. ```blast``` takes the combined pep output from ```longIsoform``` as input using [DIAMOND](https://github.com/bbuchfink/diamond)
to run an all against all BLASTP search. The output can be found in **intermediate_files/all.pep.combined.blastall.out**

6. ```silix``` takes as input the output from ```blast``` and assigns proteins to putative gene families in the file **intermediate_files/all.pep.combined_r90_SLX.fnodes**

7. ```mafft``` generates multiple protein squence alignments for the families generated in ```silix``` into files **Families/family_{fam}.aln**
8. ```fasttree``` reconstructs phylogenies for the alignments generated by ```mafft``` into files **Families/family_{fam}.tree**

9. ```trimAln``` trims spurious columns from output of ```mafft``` in files **Families/family_{fam}.trimmed.aln**

10. ```hyphy``` takes trimmed alignments reverse translated to become codon alignments and classifies the selective regime of each site in each family. Output is placed in **Families/family_{fam}\_dir/family_{fam}.aln.codon.FUBAR.json**

# Investigating families of interest

Use the following command to parse only the json files listed in the **famsUnderSelection.txt** file and place them in a nice csv file per family. The columns will have the following information per codon position of the family alignment:

1. alpha Mean posterior synonymous substitution rate at a site
2. beta Mean posterior non-synonymous substitution rate at a site
3. beta-alpha Mean posterior beta-alpha
Prob[alpha>beta] Posterior probability of negative selection at a site
4. Prob[alpha<beta] Posterior probability of positive selection at a site
5. BayesFactor[alpha<beta] Empiricial Bayes Factor for positive selection at a site
6. PSRF Potential scale reduction factor - an MCMC mixing measure
7. Neff Estimated effective sample site for Prob [alpha<beta]

```bash
python FUSTr/utils/fubar_json.FUSTr.py -d <directory_with_fastas>
```
